README.md, before:

# yolo-router

A discrete-event simulation (SimPy) that was written entirely using spec driven development with OpenAI GPT5 + Cline in VSCode. For details on the design spec and prompts used
see design.md. The total cost for generating this simulation was $6.52 using a combination of combination of GPT-5 for planning and GPT-5-mini for acting.

The simulation presents supports supports two load-balancing architectures and their scaling behaviors under configurable traffic:

- Round Robin (RR)
- Least Connections (LC)

The simulation uses simulated time only (SimPy `env.now`/`env.timeout`), never wall-clock time. Metrics are captured in an event-driven way at every load balancing decision.

## Quickstart

1) Create a virtual environment and install dependencies:
```
python3 -m venv .venv
source .venv/bin/activate
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

2) Run one of the example scenarios:
```
# Round Robin
python -m yolo_router --config configs/example_round_robin.json

# Least Connections
python -m yolo_router --config configs/example_least_conns.json
```

3) Find the reports:
- JSON: `reports/<scenario>/report.json`
- Markdown: `reports/<scenario>/report.md`
- HTML: `reports/<scenario>/report.html` (if `html` writer enabled)

4) CLI overrides (optional):
- `--arch round_robin|least_conns` override architecture
- `--seed <int>` set RNG seed for reproducibility
- `--output-dir <path>` change output directory

Example:
```
python -m yolo_router --config configs/example_round_robin.json --seed 999 --output-dir out/rr
```

## Configuration

Provide a JSON config file. The examples in `configs/` are good starting points.

Top-level sections:

- `simulation`
  - `seed` (int): RNG seed
  - `duration_ms` (int): simulated time to generate arrivals
  - `drain_ms` (int): time to allow in-flight requests to complete after generation stops
  - `total_time_ms` (int, optional): hard stop time for the entire test run (sim-time). If set, the simulation halts at this time regardless of drain settings.
- `traffic`
  - `arrival`: controls inter-arrival sampling
    - `distribution`: "poisson" | "exponential" | "normal" | "deterministic"
      - poisson: `rate_per_sec` (float)
      - exponential: `lambda` (events per ms, float)
      - normal: `mean_ms`, `stddev_ms` (float)
      - deterministic: `interval_ms` (float)
    - `ramp` (optional): configures request rate ramping over sim time (applies when `distribution` = "poisson")
      - `mode`: "none" | "linear" | "steps"
      - If `linear`:
        - `start_rate_per_sec` (float)
        - `end_rate_per_sec` (float)
        - `ramp_duration_ms` (int) — time to ramp from start to end
        - `hold_duration_ms` (int) — time to hold at end rate
      - If `steps`:
        - `steps`: array of objects { `t_ms`: int, `rate_per_sec`: float } applied piecewise by time
  - `request_duration_ms`: service time per request on a target
    - `mode`: "distribution" | "percentiles"
    - if `distribution`:
      - "lognormal": `mean_ms`, `sigma`
      - "normal": `mean_ms`, `stddev_ms`
      - "exponential": `lambda_ms` (1/mean_ms)
      - "deterministic": `value_ms`
    - if `percentiles`: `percentiles` object with `p50`, `p80`, `p90`, `p99`, `p100`
  - `cpu_demand`: per-request CPU demand (arbitrary units)
    - `mode`: "distribution" | "percentiles"
    - if `distribution`:
      - "normal": `mean`, `stddev`
      - "lognormal": `mean`, `sigma`
      - "exponential": `lambda` (1/mean)
      - "deterministic": `value`
    - if `percentiles`: `percentiles` object with `p50`, `p80`, `p90`, `p99`, `p100`
- `load_balancer`
  - `architecture`: "round_robin" | "least_conns"
  - `hosts` (int): number of LB hosts
  - `rr`:
    - `retry_limit` (int): LB retries on target rejection
    - `sync_delay_ms` (int): propagation delay for topology updates to other hosts
    - `idle_scale_down_threshold_requests_5m` (int): legacy threshold (see notes below)
  - `lc`:
    - `shared_map_lock_latency_ms` (int): optional lock latency overhead
    - `idle_scale_down_threshold_outstanding_5m` (int): legacy threshold (see notes below)
- `targets`
  - `initial_count` (int)
  - `max_concurrency_per_target` (int): hard concurrent request cap per target
  - `cpu_capacity_per_target` (float): CPU capacity unit per target
- `scaling`
  - `min_targets` (int): lower bound on fleet size
  - `max_targets` (int): upper bound on fleet size
  - `scale_up_delay_ms` (int)
  - `scale_down_delay_ms` (int)
  - `idle_scale_down_avg_concurrency_1m` (float, optional): new config to control scale-down selection — targets with trailing-1m average concurrency below this value are eligible for scale-down (default 1.0 if omitted).
- `sampling`
  - `mode`: "event" (event-driven sampling at LB decision boundaries)
  - `sample_on`: array; currently includes "lb_decision"
- `reporting`
  - `output_dir` (string)
  - `writers`: ["json", "markdown", "html"] (set of writers)

### Example: Round Robin config (excerpt)

```
{
  "simulation": { "seed": 123, "duration_ms": 60000, "drain_ms": 5000 },
  "traffic": {
    "arrival": { "distribution": "poisson", "rate_per_sec": 50.0 },
    "request_duration_ms": { "mode": "distribution", "distribution": "lognormal", "mean_ms": 100.0, "sigma": 0.5 },
    "cpu_demand": { "mode": "distribution", "distribution": "normal", "mean": 10.0, "stddev": 2.0 }
  },
  "load_balancer": {
    "architecture": "round_robin",
    "hosts": 3,
    "rr": { "retry_limit": 2, "sync_delay_ms": 100, "idle_scale_down_threshold_requests_5m": 2 }
  },
  "targets": {
    "initial_count": 4,
    "max_concurrency_per_target": 8,
    "cpu_capacity_per_target": 100.0
  },
  "scaling": {
    "min_targets": 1,
    "max_targets": 50,
    "scale_up_delay_ms": 200,
    "scale_down_delay_ms": 300,
    "idle_scale_down_avg_concurrency_1m": 1.0
  },
  "sampling": { "mode": "event", "sample_on": ["lb_decision"] },
  "reporting": { "output_dir": "reports/round_robin", "writers": ["json", "markdown", "html"] }
}
```

## What the reports show

Reports are generated at the end of the run:

- Retries histogram: counts how many requests required 0, 1, 2, ... retries.
- Percentiles (p100, p99, p90, p80, p50) for:
  - Per-target concurrent requests (from decision-time snapshots)
  - Per-target CPU utilization (from decision-time snapshots)
  - Request durations (service time on target)
  - End-to-end request latencies (LB arrival to completion)
- Fleet size percentiles (from decision-time snapshots)
- Per-target metrics (JSON and Markdown):
  - total_requests handled by each target
  - Percentiles for concurrency, CPU utilization, request duration, and latency

Visualizations in the HTML report:
- Latency Over Time:
  - Per-request latency scatter markers (every completed request)
  - Trailing 1-minute percentile lines: p99.99, p99.9, p99, p90, p80 (computed on the full completion stream)
- Latency Distribution (histogram) and Service Duration Distribution (histogram)
  - These histograms now use the full set of collected samples (no downsample), so they reflect all completed requests for the run.

Notes:
- Sampling is event-driven at every load-balancing decision, reflecting state at decision boundaries.
- The scale-down selection logic was updated to use a trailing 1-minute average concurrency per target (configurable via `scaling.idle_scale_down_avg_concurrency_1m`) rather than the previous "handled requests in trailing 5 minutes" counting approach. Both RR and LC scale-down scanners use the trailing-1m average concurrency criterion.
- If runs produce very large sample counts, the HTML histogram render may be heavier in the browser. If that becomes an issue we can:
  - Keep percentiles computed from the full sample set but downsample only for the histogram rendering (configurable cap).
  - Add a config flag to control histogram sample capping.
- All times are simulated time (ms). No wall-clock (e.g. `time.time()`/`sleep`) is used.

## Project layout

- `yolo_router/`
  - `__init__.py`: package metadata
  - `__main__.py`: module entrypoint (`python -m yolo_router`)
  - `cli.py`: main implementation and CLI
    - Configuration loader (with defaults)
    - Core simulation classes (see below)
    - Reporting and writers
- `configs/`
  - `example_round_robin.json`, `example_least_conns.json`: ready-to-run examples
- `requirements.txt`: Python dependencies
- `design.md`: original design brief
- `reports/`: output folder for generated reports (created at runtime)

## Key classes and functions (yolo_router/cli.py)

- Simulation driver
  - `class Simulation`: orchestrates the entire run
    - Initializes SimPy `env`, RNG, Topology, ScalingService, LB hosts, and targets
    - Request generator process samples inter-arrival times and submits requests to randomly chosen LB hosts
    - `run()`: advances simulated time, drains, and returns the report dict
- Traffic and request
  - `class Request`: request attributes (arrival time, duration, cpu_demand, retries, start/end times, chosen target)
  - Sampling helpers (functions) for arrival, duration, and cpu_demand distributions
- Targets and topology
  - `class Target`: accepts/denies requests based on `max_concurrency`; starts a service process; tracks current concurrency and CPU utilization; updates metrics on completion
  - `class Topology`: holds `Target` instances, manages IDs, broadcasts topology changes to LB hosts
- Scaling
  - `class ScalingService`: SimPy processes for `scale_up` and `scale_down` with configured delays; enforces `min_targets`/`max_targets`
- Load balancers
  - `class LBHostBase`: base class for LB hosts; defines the snapshot mechanism invoked after decisions
  - `class RoundRobinLBHost`:
    - Maintains per-host local list of targets and round-robin index
    - On rejection, retries up to `retry_limit`; then scales up if needed
    - Propagates topology changes to other hosts after `sync_delay_ms` (initiator learns immediately)
    - Periodic (sim-time) scan for idle targets to scale down (uses trailing-1m avg concurrency by default if configured)
  - `class SharedLeastConnsState`: shared outstanding count map protected by a `simpy.Resource` mutex; methods update counts with optional lock latency
  - `class LeastConnsLBHost`:
    - Atomically selects target with the least outstanding requests under `max_concurrency`
    - If none available, scales up and routes to new target (updating shared state)
    - Tracks completion via shared state; also performs idle scale-down scans (uses trailing-1m avg concurrency by default if configured)
- Metrics and reporting
  - `class MetricsCollector`:
    - Request-level metrics: retries, latencies, service durations
    - Event-driven snapshots after each LB decision: fleet size, per-target concurrency, per-target CPU utilization
    - Per-target aggregates: request counts and percentiles for concurrency, CPU utilization, durations, and latencies
    - `build_report()`: returns a dict consumed by writers
    - `report_markdown(report)`: returns a Markdown string
- CLI
  - `main(argv=None)`: parses arguments, loads/merges config, runs `Simulation`, writes JSON/Markdown/HTML reports

## Modeling notes

- Simulated time:
  - All timers/delays use `env.timeout(ms)` and `env.now` (ms). The 5-minute idle windows are based on simulated ms.
- Event-driven sampling:
  - Snapshots happen after every LB decision: accept, reject (before retry), and scale-then-route.
- RR propagation:
  - When scaling changes occur, the initiating host updates its local view immediately; others receive updates after `sync_delay_ms`.
- LC atomicity:
  - Target selection and outstanding count updates are protected by a single-capacity `simpy.Resource` to model a shared, consistent view.

## Reproducibility

- Set `simulation.seed` in config or `--seed` via CLI to get repeatable runs.

## Troubleshooting

- Missing dependencies:
  - Ensure you are in the virtual environment and ran `pip install -r requirements.txt`
- No reports:
  - Check that the configured `reporting.output_dir` is writable
  - Ensure the simulation `duration_ms` is non-zero and traffic arrival rate is reasonable

## License

This repository is provided for simulation and experimentation per the included design brief. Ensure you comply with any applicable licenses for dependencies listed in `requirements.txt`.

Commit message:

Added better documentation and final update to graphs

README.md, after:

# yolo-router

A discrete-event simulation (SimPy) that was written entirely using spec driven development with OpenAI GPT5 + Cline in VSCode. For details on the design spec and prompts used
see design.md. The total cost for generating this simulation was $7.52 using a combination of combination of GPT-5 for planning and GPT-5-mini for acting.

The simulation presents supports supports two load-balancing architectures and their scaling behaviors under configurable traffic:

- Round Robin (RR)
- Least Connections (LC)

The simulation uses simulated time only (SimPy `env.now`/`env.timeout`), never wall-clock time. Metrics are captured in an event-driven way at every load balancing decision.

## Reports

Each run of the simulation will generate a markdown, json, and HTML report. [Here is an example of the HTML report (saved as PDF)](docs/sample_reports/round_robin_report.pdf). You can also see some of the graphs below. They are normally interactive (javascript) graphs when loading the HTML report.

The rates over time graph show how the request rate, retry rate, and reject (no capacity) rates vary over time in relation to each other.
![Alt text](docs/images/rates_over_time.png)

The "Available At Reject" graph shows the distribution of how many targets had one ore more free request slots at the time when a request was rejected due to (a) too many retries and (b) inability to add more capacity. This is a great measure of load balancing efficiency.
![Alt text](docs/images/available_at_reject.png)

The "Latency Over Time" graph shows how latency in the system changed over the course of the simulation.
![Alt text](docs/images/latency_over_time.png)

The "Service Overhead Over Time" graph shows how much latency is being added by retries, scaling, etc.
![Alt text](docs/images/service_overhead.png)

 
## Quickstart

1) Create a virtual environment and install dependencies:
```
python3 -m venv .venv
source .venv/bin/activate
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

2) Run one of the example scenarios:
```
# Round Robin
python -m yolo_router --config configs/example_round_robin.json

# Least Connections
python -m yolo_router --config configs/example_least_conns.json
```

3) Find the reports:
- JSON: `reports/<scenario>/report.json`
- Markdown: `reports/<scenario>/report.md`
- HTML: `reports/<scenario>/report.html` (if `html` writer enabled)

4) CLI overrides (optional):
- `--arch round_robin|least_conns` override architecture
- `--seed <int>` set RNG seed for reproducibility
- `--output-dir <path>` change output directory

Example:
```
python -m yolo_router --config configs/example_round_robin.json --seed 999 --output-dir out/rr
```

## Configuration

Provide a JSON config file. The examples in `configs/` are good starting points.

Top-level sections:

- `simulation`
  - `seed` (int): RNG seed
  - `duration_ms` (int): simulated time to generate arrivals
  - `drain_ms` (int): time to allow in-flight requests to complete after generation stops
  - `total_time_ms` (int, optional): hard stop time for the entire test run (sim-time). If set, the simulation halts at this time regardless of drain settings.
- `traffic`
  - `arrival`: controls inter-arrival sampling
    - `distribution`: "poisson" | "exponential" | "normal" | "deterministic"
      - poisson: `rate_per_sec` (float)
      - exponential: `lambda` (events per ms, float)
      - normal: `mean_ms`, `stddev_ms` (float)
      - deterministic: `interval_ms` (float)
    - `ramp` (optional): configures request rate ramping over sim time (applies when `distribution` = "poisson")
      - `mode`: "none" | "linear" | "steps"
      - If `linear`:
        - `start_rate_per_sec` (float)
        - `end_rate_per_sec` (float)
        - `ramp_duration_ms` (int) — time to ramp from start to end
        - `hold_duration_ms` (int) — time to hold at end rate
      - If `steps`:
        - `steps`: array of objects { `t_ms`: int, `rate_per_sec`: float } applied piecewise by time
  - `request_duration_ms`: service time per request on a target
    - `mode`: "distribution" | "percentiles"
    - if `distribution`:
      - "lognormal": `mean_ms`, `sigma`
      - "normal": `mean_ms`, `stddev_ms`
      - "exponential": `lambda_ms` (1/mean_ms)
      - "deterministic": `value_ms`
    - if `percentiles`: `percentiles` object with `p50`, `p80`, `p90`, `p99`, `p100`
  - `cpu_demand`: per-request CPU demand (arbitrary units)
    - `mode`: "distribution" | "percentiles"
    - if `distribution`:
      - "normal": `mean`, `stddev`
      - "lognormal": `mean`, `sigma`
      - "exponential": `lambda` (1/mean)
      - "deterministic": `value`
    - if `percentiles`: `percentiles` object with `p50`, `p80`, `p90`, `p99`, `p100`
- `load_balancer`
  - `architecture`: "round_robin" | "least_conns"
  - `hosts` (int): number of LB hosts
  - `rr`:
    - `retry_limit` (int): LB retries on target rejection
    - `sync_delay_ms` (int): propagation delay for topology updates to other hosts
    - `idle_scale_down_threshold_requests_5m` (int): legacy threshold (see notes below)
  - `lc`:
    - `shared_map_lock_latency_ms` (int): optional lock latency overhead
    - `idle_scale_down_threshold_outstanding_5m` (int): legacy threshold (see notes below)
- `targets`
  - `initial_count` (int)
  - `max_concurrency_per_target` (int): hard concurrent request cap per target
  - `cpu_capacity_per_target` (float): CPU capacity unit per target
- `scaling`
  - `min_targets` (int): lower bound on fleet size
  - `max_targets` (int): upper bound on fleet size
  - `scale_up_delay_ms` (int)
  - `scale_down_delay_ms` (int)
  - `idle_scale_down_avg_concurrency_1m` (float, optional): new config to control scale-down selection — targets with trailing-1m average concurrency below this value are eligible for scale-down (default 1.0 if omitted).
- `sampling`
  - `mode`: "event" (event-driven sampling at LB decision boundaries)
  - `sample_on`: array; currently includes "lb_decision"
- `reporting`
  - `output_dir` (string)
  - `writers`: ["json", "markdown", "html"] (set of writers)

### Example: Round Robin config (excerpt)

```
{
  "simulation": { "seed": 123, "duration_ms": 60000, "drain_ms": 5000 },
  "traffic": {
    "arrival": { "distribution": "poisson", "rate_per_sec": 50.0 },
    "request_duration_ms": { "mode": "distribution", "distribution": "lognormal", "mean_ms": 100.0, "sigma": 0.5 },
    "cpu_demand": { "mode": "distribution", "distribution": "normal", "mean": 10.0, "stddev": 2.0 }
  },
  "load_balancer": {
    "architecture": "round_robin",
    "hosts": 3,
    "rr": { "retry_limit": 2, "sync_delay_ms": 100, "idle_scale_down_threshold_requests_5m": 2 }
  },
  "targets": {
    "initial_count": 4,
    "max_concurrency_per_target": 8,
    "cpu_capacity_per_target": 100.0
  },
  "scaling": {
    "min_targets": 1,
    "max_targets": 50,
    "scale_up_delay_ms": 200,
    "scale_down_delay_ms": 300,
    "idle_scale_down_avg_concurrency_1m": 1.0
  },
  "sampling": { "mode": "event", "sample_on": ["lb_decision"] },
  "reporting": { "output_dir": "reports/round_robin", "writers": ["json", "markdown", "html"] }
}
```

## What the reports show

Reports are generated at the end of the run:

- Retries histogram: counts how many requests required 0, 1, 2, ... retries.
- Percentiles (p100, p99, p90, p80, p50) for:
  - Per-target concurrent requests (from decision-time snapshots)
  - Per-target CPU utilization (from decision-time snapshots)
  - Request durations (service time on target)
  - End-to-end request latencies (LB arrival to completion)
- Fleet size percentiles (from decision-time snapshots)
- Per-target metrics (JSON and Markdown):
  - total_requests handled by each target
  - Percentiles for concurrency, CPU utilization, request duration, and latency

Visualizations in the HTML report:
- Latency Over Time:
  - Per-request latency scatter markers (every completed request)
  - Trailing 1-minute percentile lines: p99.99, p99.9, p99, p90, p80 (computed on the full completion stream)
- Latency Distribution (histogram) and Service Duration Distribution (histogram)
  - These histograms now use the full set of collected samples (no downsample), so they reflect all completed requests for the run.

Notes:
- Sampling is event-driven at every load-balancing decision, reflecting state at decision boundaries.
- The scale-down selection logic was updated to use a trailing 1-minute average concurrency per target (configurable via `scaling.idle_scale_down_avg_concurrency_1m`) rather than the previous "handled requests in trailing 5 minutes" counting approach. Both RR and LC scale-down scanners use the trailing-1m average concurrency criterion.
- If runs produce very large sample counts, the HTML histogram render may be heavier in the browser. If that becomes an issue we can:
  - Keep percentiles computed from the full sample set but downsample only for the histogram rendering (configurable cap).
  - Add a config flag to control histogram sample capping.
- All times are simulated time (ms). No wall-clock (e.g. `time.time()`/`sleep`) is used.

## Project layout

- `yolo_router/`
  - `__init__.py`: package metadata
  - `__main__.py`: module entrypoint (`python -m yolo_router`)
  - `cli.py`: main implementation and CLI
    - Configuration loader (with defaults)
    - Core simulation classes (see below)
    - Reporting and writers
- `configs/`
  - `example_round_robin.json`, `example_least_conns.json`: ready-to-run examples
- `requirements.txt`: Python dependencies
- `design.md`: original design brief
- `reports/`: output folder for generated reports (created at runtime)

## Key classes and functions (yolo_router/cli.py)

- Simulation driver
  - `class Simulation`: orchestrates the entire run
    - Initializes SimPy `env`, RNG, Topology, ScalingService, LB hosts, and targets
    - Request generator process samples inter-arrival times and submits requests to randomly chosen LB hosts
    - `run()`: advances simulated time, drains, and returns the report dict
- Traffic and request
  - `class Request`: request attributes (arrival time, duration, cpu_demand, retries, start/end times, chosen target)
  - Sampling helpers (functions) for arrival, duration, and cpu_demand distributions
- Targets and topology
  - `class Target`: accepts/denies requests based on `max_concurrency`; starts a service process; tracks current concurrency and CPU utilization; updates metrics on completion
  - `class Topology`: holds `Target` instances, manages IDs, broadcasts topology changes to LB hosts
- Scaling
  - `class ScalingService`: SimPy processes for `scale_up` and `scale_down` with configured delays; enforces `min_targets`/`max_targets`
- Load balancers
  - `class LBHostBase`: base class for LB hosts; defines the snapshot mechanism invoked after decisions
  - `class RoundRobinLBHost`:
    - Maintains per-host local list of targets and round-robin index
    - On rejection, retries up to `retry_limit`; then scales up if needed
    - Propagates topology changes to other hosts after `sync_delay_ms` (initiator learns immediately)
    - Periodic (sim-time) scan for idle targets to scale down (uses trailing-1m avg concurrency by default if configured)
  - `class SharedLeastConnsState`: shared outstanding count map protected by a `simpy.Resource` mutex; methods update counts with optional lock latency
  - `class LeastConnsLBHost`:
    - Atomically selects target with the least outstanding requests under `max_concurrency`
    - If none available, scales up and routes to new target (updating shared state)
    - Tracks completion via shared state; also performs idle scale-down scans (uses trailing-1m avg concurrency by default if configured)
- Metrics and reporting
  - `class MetricsCollector`:
    - Request-level metrics: retries, latencies, service durations
    - Event-driven snapshots after each LB decision: fleet size, per-target concurrency, per-target CPU utilization
    - Per-target aggregates: request counts and percentiles for concurrency, CPU utilization, durations, and latencies
    - `build_report()`: returns a dict consumed by writers
    - `report_markdown(report)`: returns a Markdown string
- CLI
  - `main(argv=None)`: parses arguments, loads/merges config, runs `Simulation`, writes JSON/Markdown/HTML reports

## Modeling notes

- Simulated time:
  - All timers/delays use `env.timeout(ms)` and `env.now` (ms). The 5-minute idle windows are based on simulated ms.
- Event-driven sampling:
  - Snapshots happen after every LB decision: accept, reject (before retry), and scale-then-route.
- RR propagation:
  - When scaling changes occur, the initiating host updates its local view immediately; others receive updates after `sync_delay_ms`.
- LC atomicity:
  - Target selection and outstanding count updates are protected by a single-capacity `simpy.Resource` to model a shared, consistent view.

## Reproducibility

- Set `simulation.seed` in config or `--seed` via CLI to get repeatable runs.

## Troubleshooting

- Missing dependencies:
  - Ensure you are in the virtual environment and ran `pip install -r requirements.txt`
- No reports:
  - Check that the configured `reporting.output_dir` is writable
  - Ensure the simulation `duration_ms` is non-zero and traffic arrival rate is reasonable

## License

This repository is provided for simulation and experimentation per the included design brief. Ensure you comply with any applicable licenses for dependencies listed in `requirements.txt`.
